If you want to know if someone really
understands evolution, just ask them
this one weird question.
>> Why does poop smell bad?
>> Wow.
>> Oh gosh.
>> Because that's bacteria in it. I guess
>> microbiome. Probably trash.
>> Yeah, trash the body. The food we eat
because of the chemicals.
>> Arts don't always smell bad.
>> So,
>> yeah. Well, that's that's a different
question entirely.
>> Do you think it objectively smells bad?
>> M. Yes, I think so.
>> Yes.
>> How do you think it smells to flies?
Like the
>> They like it. They like it.
>> Animals love stinky things.
>> Yeah,
>> they're attracted to it.
>> Poop smells good to flies because poop
is full of nutrients. They use it as
food. But it's also full of bacteria
that can be life-threatening to humans.
So, the real reason poop smelled bad to
us is because if anyone ever thought it
smelled good, they would probably get
really sick, die, and not pass on their
genes. After all, it's about survival of
the fittest. But survival of the
fittest? What? I mean, most people think
of natural selection as being about the
survival of the fittest individual
animal.
>> Individual.
>> Individuals.
>> Animal.
>> Animal. Okay. So, it's like an
individual.
>> Yeah.
>> Which makes sense. I mean, individuals
best adapted to their environment have
increased odds of survival and therefore
a higher likelihood of passing on their
genes. So, it follows that each
individual should do everything it can
to survive and reproduce. That is, it
should be selfish. But if that's true,
then how do you explain this? I mean,
worker bees will sting predators to
protect the hive, even though it might
kill them in the process. Female worker
ants are sterile, so they can't
reproduce. But regardless, they work for
the colony for their entire lives until
they die. Monkeys adopt orphans. Wolves
bring meat to non-hunting members of the
pack. And squirrels can let out alarm
calls to warn others about nearby
predators.
>> So if natural selection is all about
selfish individuals, why do we observe
so much altruism in nature?
>> The survival is of the species that can
adapt.
>> It's generally the species
>> for the survival of the species.
>> So it's the survival of the species.
>> Okay.
>> But survival of the fittest species or
the fittest group also doesn't work. I
mean think about what you need for
natural selection to occur. You need
something that replicates itself many
times over, creating copies. And then
you need a pruning process whereby some
of those copies get eliminated and some
thrive to go on and create more copies.
The problem with groups or species as a
whole is that they don't typically make
copies of themselves. So you almost
never get copies of groups fighting
other copies of groups to see which
groups win out. So, if it's not survival
of the fittest individual and it's not
survival of the fittest group, then what
is it? Well, to explain that, I want to
take you on a little journey all the way
back to the beginnings of the earth.
Where we are now, there is nothing.
Well, not really nothing, but nothing
interesting. There are only simple
things like these blobs. This one might
be a carbon dioxide molecule or it might
be cyanide. We don't know for sure what
they are, but we do know that these
compounds are very simple. So, for now,
they'll just be blobs floating around
our void. In fact, much of what we'll
encounter along our journey here are
just hypotheses. A lot of Earth's early
history is still a mystery, so keep that
in mind. Now, every so often, our blobs
get a surplus of energy, maybe from a
ray of UV light or a nearby hot source.
This is the first major upgrade to our
void, excess energy, as it allows our
blobs to interact with each other. Most
of the time, this interaction leads to
nothing. But sometimes, these blobs can
combine into more complicated compounds.
Here's a simple simulated example where
we only have four red blobs. Right now,
they are all individual particles. But
each time step we move forward, let's
say there's a 10% chance that all four
combine into one red mega blob. Now,
imagine this mega blob isn't very
stable. For every time step it's alive,
it has a 95% chance of falling apart
back into the four smaller blobs. If we
add more of these red blobs into the
mix, you'll notice that they rarely ever
come together. On average, a mega blob
only exists around 10% of the time. But
if we were to reduce the chances of the
mega blobs dissolving to only 1%, the
void would suddenly be filled with them.
This fact hints at an important law that
governs our void. The law of stability.
Unstable blobs fall apart and vanish.
Stable ones endure.
Now watch what happens if we speed this
up dramatically. Maybe a couple of years
per second. Maybe even a couple million.
You can see our blobs keep getting
random jolts of energy, so they combine
with others to form more complex
compounds.
Most attempts fail and fall apart. But
every so often, by pure chance, you get
a compound that is more stable than the
blobs it's made of. This doesn't happen
because the blobs want to build more
complex structures. It's just because
these new configurations happen to be
more favorable in the environment. And
now when these complicated compounds
become abundant enough, they too get a
chance to combine, making our void
increasingly complex.
And one day, by accident, this causes an
extremely unique shape to form, one with
a special property. See, the blobs it's
made of just happen to attract similar
blobs from the surrounding environment.
This red blob always attracts green
blobs, and this purple blob always
attracts yellow ones. And piece by
piece, all these blobs attract their
opposites until their counterparts
suddenly snap into position next to the
original shape. Now, this shape goes on
to do the same thing. Its green blobs
attract red ones and yellow ones attract
the purple until another shape yet again
snaps into position. This new shape
looks exactly like the original. What
just happened fully spontaneously is
replication. One shape became two. This
marks the birth of the first replicator.
We don't know exactly what this
replicator looked like. It might have
been a single standalone molecule or a
group of molecules that worked together
to replicate. There's a lot of debate on
this today. So, instead, let's represent
the replicator as a character. How about
this one here? Perfect. Keep in mind,
it's still just a lifeless molecule, one
without any intent or purpose.
Now, you might think that the chances
for the replicator to form were
extremely unlikely. But in our void,
where we have hundreds of millions of
years to play with, what might seem
impossible to us becomes virtually
inevitable. And the thing is, the
replicator only has to arise once. Once
it's here, it can take the simpler
compounds available in the environment
to copy itself at a much faster pace.
And so, it does that until it entirely
fills our void. At least that's what
you'd expect. But there is a flaw in the
process. See, during the replicator's
conquest of the void, one of its copies
makes a mistake.
Perhaps a stray ray of UV light hits it
during the replication process, or the
replicator uses a building block it
wasn't supposed to. As a result, what
we're left with is a new shape which is
slightly different from its parent, and
so its properties might be slightly
different, too.
This error might be harmful. For
example, it might make the copy less
stable. It could be beneficial, making
the copy better at replicating. Or it
could be neutral, not changing the
replicator in any meaningful way. This
marks the final milestone in our void,
mutation. Many species of replicators
now occupy the void. And what they do is
they replicate themselves. The problem
is they all need the same limited
resources. And so our void turns into a
battleground. So which replicator will
win? What kind of properties will the
void favor? Well, let's try to simulate
what happens.
Now, if you're looking to run your own
simulations or need a place to run your
own code, look no further than today's
sponsor, Hostinger. Say you wanted to
keep track of everyday science news.
Manually filtering through thousands of
articles for the most important or
interesting stories would be almost
impossible. But Hostinger lets you
easily automate this process. You can
use N8N, a platform that lets you
automate tasks, but you need a place to
host it. And the easiest, most
cost-effective and secure place to host
NAN workflows is on a virtual private
server or VPS from Hostinger. It's like
a powerful computer you rent on the
cloud. So, here's how you can create an
article scrubber. The workflow can grab
every new science article from a list of
portals. Then it can send the articles
to chat GPT to summarize their content.
And finally, you can add these quick
summaries to a board in notion. Using
Hostinger's pre-installed NADN template,
the setup only takes one click and
you're good to start creating workflows.
By hosting NAD on a Hostinger VPS, you
get all the resources needed to run your
workflow smoothly 24/7. Plus, you can
have unlimited workflows running
simultaneously. Imagine the things you
could do and the time you could save
with automations on Hostinger. They're
having a Black Friday sale right now.
So, don't miss out. Scan this QR code or
visit hostinger.com/veritassiumnad
and use code veritassium to get an extra
discount on top of this sale. I want to
thank Hostinger for sponsoring this part
of the video. And now back to our
simulation.
To simulate what a replicator battle
might look like, let's assign simplified
traits to each of the replicators.
Starting with the first one.
This replicator is special since it's
the only one that can form spontaneously
from smaller building blocks. So, we'll
give it a spawn rate. This should be
quite rare. So, let's set the chance of
formation to 1% per time step. Just keep
in mind we're just making these numbers
up. The simulation is purely
illustrative. Now, once the replicator
spawns, let's say it's governed by three
key traits. First, a death rate. The
chance of it falling apart or being
destroyed with each time step. Let's set
that to be say 2%. Second, a replication
rate. The chance to copy itself with
each time step. Let's say 4%. And
finally, a mutation rate. The chance a
copy comes out mutated. If it's 4%,
roughly 1 in 25 copies will be a
mutation. So every time a new mutation
spawns, it will inherit the replication,
death, and mutation stats from its
parent, but slightly randomized. Notice
that we won't give any of these
secondary replicators a spawn rate.
They'll only be able to form as
mutations from previous generations. So,
if all of their copies die out, they'll
be gone for good. Now, before we run the
simulation, I want to quickly shout out
the YouTube channel Primer. Our setup
was inspired by his amazing in-depth
simulations on evolutionary biology. You
should really check them out. Okay,
let's run it. The graph on the right
will show how the populations grow, and
this box on the left will show a slice
of the void with all the winning
replicators in the correct ratios.
You can see how the first replicator
appears and then immediately disappears
because it just happened to die before
it got the chance to replicate. But
that's okay. The original replicator can
be created from smaller blobs, so it'll
come back at some point. This time, it's
starting to take off. You can also see
that it spawned some mutations, but
they're struggling to keep up.
Eventually though, superior mutations
pop up and start to replicate faster
than the original. But you can see
almost all of them are growing
exponentially, which is unrealistic.
That's because we're missing the final
piece of our simulation, limited
resources. The building blocks should
eventually run out. We can simulate this
effect by introducing a sort of resource
factor to each species replication rate.
This factor should depend on the total
number of replicators in the void N
which we'll also divide with an
arbitrary crowding factor C. C lets us
define the maximum number of replicators
we'll allow into the void. Say C is
10,000. Then once there are 10,000
replicators, the two terms cancel out
and drive the replication rate down to
zero. Meaning none of the replicators
will be able to make copies until the
population drops again. So let's see how
this changes our simulation. Okay, like
the last time, the original replicator
starts to grow, after which it's quickly
taken over by its mutations.
But this time, most of these mutation
populations start to decline.
Because of the scarce resources, the new
best population, the lime one, actually
starts stealing resources from the
others. After that, a few more mutations
pop up, even more powerful than the
lime. Ultimately, the purple replicator
takes over, occupying around 9,000 of
the 10,000 available spaces. It
completely curbs all the other
populations.
It goes without saying that the
environment plays a massive role in
which replicator wins. If you change the
environment, you likely change the
outcome. But let's look at the stats of
the replicator that came out on top this
time. That winning species has a
replication rate of 20% compared to the
17% average across all populations.
Obviously, being able to replicate
quickly pays off here. Its death rate is
below average. Replicators that fall
apart less quickly can make more copies.
And finally, it has a 1% mutation rate
compared to the average of 3.73%.
Although mutations help by injecting
diversity, for any single species, fewer
mutations mean more faithful copies.
If we rerun the simulation, you'll
notice the outcomes are always slightly
different. But the winning species
consistently have high replication and
low death and mutation rates.
Now, in the real void, things wouldn't
have been as simple. Instead of just
tweaking these three stats, the
replicators would have to mutate all
sorts of different ways to gain an
advantage. For example, one replicator
might mutate a trait that lets it
destroy other individuals and then use
their building blocks to make more
copies of itself. This looks like
strategy, but it's really just chemistry
that gets copied over and over because
it helps the replicator survive.
Naturally, a risk of offense would
likely favor mutations that result in
defense. So, an opposing replicator
might stumble upon a mutation that helps
it form protective barriers from nearby
materials, letting it endure those
attacks. These barriers would also help
protect the fragile replicators from
environmental damage like UV light. This
marks an important threshold. The
replicator's traits aren't limited to
just determining the properties of the
molecules themselves. They can also
shape the environment. So, by chance,
the replicators inevitably mutate in
ways that build scaffolding around
themselves to increase the chances of
their survival. They stumble upon ways
of making structures to propel
themselves around. They develop senses
and ways of storing energy. They even
mix, exchange, and steal traits from
each other. Through billions of years of
trial and error, this scaffolding gets
more and more complex. And as a result,
the replicator's interactions with the
void become exceedingly indirect.
They build complex survival machines for
themselves. Machines whose sole purpose
is to protect the replicators inside.
These machines became such experts at
surviving, they're still around some 4
billion years later. They are the
bacteria, plants, fungi, and animals all
around you. Everything alive, including
you, was built as a survival vessel for
these replicators. But today, you'd
barely recognize them as replicators.
Now, we just call them genes.
They're hidden deep within every living
creature. Strands of DNA made from the
sequences of A, T, G, and C nucleotides.
Now, one of the leading theories is that
those earliest replicators were actually
something closer to RNA molecules. But
then over time, this must have evolved
into a more stable system of storing
information. The DNA and proteins we use
today. They are the code that shapes our
traits. We're taught that these traits
are here solely to help ensure our
survival, the survival of the individual
or the species. But do we have this the
wrong way around?
>> When you have a child, what do you pass
on?
>> The DNA. Yeah, you know, yeah,
>> these tiny replicators are still
fighting the same battle that started
billions of years ago, and the logic
behind them hasn't changed. The traits
just become more convoluted. Replicators
that produce traits poorly suited to
their environment tend to become less
common, while those that produce
advantageous traits become more numerous
in the population. So, it's not about
the fittest individual or group. It's
fundamentally about the survival of the
fittest genes. They are the core unit of
natural selection. But why would natural
selection care exactly for the gene? Why
not something smaller or something
bigger?
Well, for something to undergo
selection, it needs to have three
characteristics. First, it needs to be
able to make near identical copies of
itself. Second, it needs to exhibit
traits that affect its interaction with
the environment, which third affect the
probability of survival and reproduction
of the replicator. Something small like
a single nucleotide doesn't work because
sure it'll make identical copies of
itself, but alone it doesn't exhibit a
trait that could be selected for. What
about something bigger like a
chromosome? Well, each chromosome
affects potentially thousands of traits
that could influence its survival. But
when most creatures reproduce, sections
of chromosomes get swapped around. So a
chromosome doesn't stay together as a
cohesive replicating unit, and therefore
it can't be selected for. But a gene is
somewhere in the middle. It's a long
enough stretch of DNA that it can
independently influence a trait, but
it's also short and stable enough to be
faithfully copied over into future
generations. This is why the gene is the
unit of natural selection. This
perspective led to one of the most
powerful and controversial ways of
seeing evolution, one popularized by
Richard Dawkins in his book, The Selfish
Gene. Based on the work of evolutionary
biologists in the 1960s and 70s, and as
a response against the then very popular
group selection theory, Dawkins argued
that just about every trait from animals
helping each other to being completely
selfish is a strategy that helps their
genes survive and replicate. Genes that
maximize their own survival are the
genes that propagate best, even if they
do so at the expense of others. Or in
Dawkins words, we are survival machines.
Robot vehicles blindly programmed to
preserve the selfish molecules known as
genes.
Now, you might think this framework
isn't all that groundbreaking. I mean,
take the emperor penguins in Antarctica,
for example. They hesitate to jump into
the water until they are sure there are
no seals around. So, what kind of genes
could help a penguin survive in this
environment? Well, if the penguin's set
of genes make it more likely to be
timid, the penguin might stay back until
someone braver tests the water. That
way, the penguin is at a lower risk of
being eaten and has a better chance of
surviving, reproducing, and passing on
its timid genes. Here, you can think
about this either as the timid genes
help the penguin, or the penguin helps
the timid genes. Either way works. So,
is there any real benefit to viewing
things from the genes perspective? Well,
look at what happens when you use these
two frameworks to explain altruistic
behavior, which appears in a lot of
places in nature. Take California ground
squirrels for example. Females will let
out alarm calls if they spot a predator
like a fox or a hawk to warn other
nearby squirrels. Even though this puts
her survival at risk, the genes
influencing this behavior surely don't
help this squirrel. But can the squirrel
still help the genes?
>> I think this is a bit more clear if you
think about the fact that most living
things reproduce sexually,
>> right?
>> So a squirrel will get half its DNA from
its mom and half from its dad. So it's
actually sharing half its genes with
each parent, but also any child that it
has, it's also going to share half of
its genes with the child, but also any
siblings. But then if you take a step
out to an uncle or up to a grandparent,
then it's sharing one quarter and then
another step out is 1/8. All to say you
share a lot of genes with your immediate
family. And California ground squirrels,
females in particular, they live around
family. So if a squirrel has a set of
genes that make her call out when she
spots a predator, there is a very good
chance that the squirrels that hear her
warning call also carry those genes.
Now, as a result of her alarm call,
let's say the squirrel attracts a
predator her way and it ends up getting
eaten. This action cost the call genes
the chance to pass themselves on to any
future offspring in that squirrel. But
if the warning call saved at least two
copies of those genes in two of the
squirrels relatives, well, then in
total, these two squirrels have a better
chance of passing on the genes through
their offspring than that single
squirrel did. From the gene's
perspective, this could be a good
trade-off.
It doesn't matter which individual helps
the genes replicate, only that as many
copies as possible survive. This
principle that altruistically helping
your close relatives helps preserve your
own genes is known as kin selection. And
the payoff behind any altruistic gesture
under kin selection depends heavily on
how related you are to the individuals
you're helping. Because the less related
you are, the smaller the chances that
you will share that particular gene with
another individual. And you can see this
in nature. Male squirrels that don't
live near relatives almost never give
out warning calls.
Now, there is a big question this
gene-entric view still has to address.
If selection really favors genes that
replicate well, then why would sex ever
evolve as a means of replication if it
throws away roughly half the genes? Most
animals reproduce sexually, so why do it
when some organisms, like certain plants
and fungi, get to pass on all of their
genes through asexual reproduction? From
a genes perspective, this seems like a
much better deal. When it comes to
sexual reproduction, people like to say,
"Okay, well, it mixes up the genes. It's
like shuffling a deck of cards, and
isn't that better for creating more
variation?" And clearly, like, that's
advantageous. Another way this has been
explained is if the genes that regulate
sexual reproduction benefit from
replicating sexually, then they're going
to keep pushing for these genes, right?
>> Even if it's a net negative to all the
other genes in the genome.
>> Yeah.
>> So, if it benefits them, they'll keep
pushing for it. So, are there any
problems with how the selfish gene
explains natural selection? Well, yes. I
mean, it turns out the framework comes
with a lot of controversy.
One of the biggest criticisms against
the selfish gene is that it leaves
little to chance. It implies that every
gene present in the genome is there
because it actively got selected for by
natural selection over many generations.
But many genes are actually invisible to
natural selection because they don't
really exhibit meaningful traits in the
population. Yet, they can still evolve
over time. Imagine 20 blind cave fish,
10 with green eyes and 10 with blue.
Since they're blind, we'll assume that
their eye color traits make no
difference to their survival. So, they
get passed down purely by chance. Now,
to form the next generation, randomly
pick any fish from the first group and
replicate it. If you repeat this 20
times, you get a second generation. By
chance alone, one color will probably
appear more often than the other. And if
you repeat this process over and over
many generations, one color might
eventually completely take over. That's
not because it's better, but purely due
to random sampling. This shift in the
frequency of gene variance is called
genetic drift. It's most apparent in
small populations and for traits that
aren't pruned by natural selection. But
it doesn't only apply to silent genes.
Even when genes exhibit meaningful
traits, there is a chance that genetic
drift overrides natural selection and a
less fit gene will spread through the
population just by chance. Look back at
our replicator battle. If we run our
simulation enough times, sometimes the
winning gene won't be the one with
traits that maximize its own survival.
Here you can see that the winning
population actually has a higher than
average mutation rate just by chance.
And the average mutation rate is also
higher than the starting value. These
are simplified examples, but there is an
ongoing argument about how much of
evolution was actually due to natural
selection and how much of it was up to
chance. Another major criticism of the
selfish gene is about the unavoidable
implication behind the word selfish. It
seems to imply that genes have agency,
like they know what they're doing and
they understand the consequences, but
it's only a metaphor, just as portraying
them as characters was a way for us to
make the story more engaging. Of course,
molecules don't know what they're doing.
They don't decide to replicate or
conspire to outco compete others. They
just react according to the laws of
physics. So what may look like intention
is just simple chemistry that happens to
work well and propagates. But perhaps
the most obvious and easiest to
understand criticism is that the whole
framework is an oversimplification. And
that's true. Genes are much more
complicated than we thought. It's not as
simple as one gene equals one trait. One
gene can influence many traits and one
trait can be influenced by many genes.
There are genes that are wholly
contained within other genes. There are
genes that inhibit or activate others.
And then there are even genes that seem
to not encode for anything. The
so-called non-oding DNA. All to say, we
still have a lot to learn about genes.
Not to mention that the environment
itself, like whether it's hot or cold or
how much food there is, also affects how
different genes get expressed. Genes are
much less deterministic than they might
seem. So, you might think that a single
gene would rarely have a large enough
effect that natural selection can
directly impact it. But it doesn't
matter how convoluted the pathway is. If
a gene has a measurable effect on its
own survival and replication, it will be
subject to some amount of natural
selection. And surely the whole theory
is a simplification. But any theory or
framework of nature is. And what we're
covering in this video is an even more
simplified picture of that framework.
But that doesn't take away the fact that
viewing the world through this lens has
an incredible power to help us
understand the process of evolution. It
helps us understand why we see such a
range of different behaviors in our
world because fundamentally those traits
tend to cause the increasing prevalence
of the genes they're associated with.
It's like the whole point is figure out
what's true, like get to the truth. And
this to me is the baseline truth of
evolution is what I love about making
veritasium is that we get to sort of
unpack and dig under the hood. And it's
what I loved about reading the selfish
gene book. So it really opened my eyes
to this. You know, previously I'd always
just probably thought at the level of
the individual, but um it makes more
sense to think at the level of the gene.
The feeling that you and every other
living organism is being driven by some
molecules deep in every cell is
fundamentally unsettling and seems to
remove agency from you as a as an acting
thinking being in the world. Yeah, it's
pretty grim. But whether or not you
agree with the fact that we might be
controlled by our genes and we're simply
their uh flesh robots,
>> right?
>> I think it's kind of unreasonable and
unrealistic to go through life thinking
that every decision is governed by this.
It doesn't really do you any good cuz we
perceive the world as as individuals. So
I think it's very beneficial to see
yourself as as your own thing, as your
own, you know, unit.
[Music]
I want to give a big shout out to Joe
Hansen from BS Smart for helping us out
with this video and another shout out to
Primer for letting us adapt his
simulation on the first replicators. I
have put links to their channels down in
the description, so please check them
out. And finally, I want to say a huge
shout out to you. Thank you for
watching.